## Introduction {.page_break_before}

### Evolution of Electronic Natural Products Resources

Natural Products (NP) research is a transdisciplinary field with wide-ranging interests: from fundamental structural aspects of naturally-occurring molecular entities to their effects on living organisms and extending to the study of chemically-mediated interactions within entire ecosystems.
Defining the "natural" qualifier is a complex task [@doi:10.1057/s41599-020-0390-y; @doi:10/bkfd8h]. We thus adopt here a broad definition of a NP as any chemical entity *found in* a living organism, hereafter refered to as a _structure-organism pair_.
An additional and fundamental element of a structure-organism pair is a reference to the experimental evidence that establishes the linkages between the chemical structure and the biological organism. A future-oriented electronic NP resource should contain fully-referenced structure-organism pairs.

Reliance on data from the NP literature presents many challenges.
The assembly and integration of NP occurrences into an inter-operative platform relies primarily on access to a heterogeneous set of databases (DB) whose content and maintenance status are critical factors in this dependency [@doi:10/gfwm27].
A tertiary inter-operative NP platform is thus dependent on a secondary set of data that has been selectively annotated into a DB from primary literature sources.
The experimental data itself reflects a complex process involving collection or sourcing of natural material (and establishment of its identity), a series of material transformation and separation steps and ultimately the chemical or spectral elucidation of isolates.
The specter of human error and the potential for the introduction of biases are present at every phase of this journey.
These include publication biases [@doi:10.1002/asi.22784], such as emphasis on novel and/or bioactive structures in the review process, or, in DB assembly stages, with selective focus on a specific compound class or a given taxonomic range, or disregard for annotation of other relevant evidence that may have been presented in primary sources.
Temporal biases also exist: a technological "state-of-the-art" when published can eventually be recast as anachronistic.

The advancement of NP research has always relied on the development of new technologies.
In the past century alone, the rate at which unambiguous identification of new NP entities from biological matrices can be achieved has been reduced from years to days and in the past few decades, the scale at which new NP discoveries are being reported has increased exponentially.
Without a means to access and process these disparate NP data points, information is fragmented and scientific progress is impaired [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0118747].
To this extent, contemporary bioinformatic tools enable the (re-)interpretation and (re-)annotation of (existing) datasets documenting molecular aspects of biodiversity [@doi:10.1038/s41598-021-87796-6; @doi:10.1038/s41592-020-0916-7].

While large, well-structured and freely accessible DB exist, they are often concerned primarily with chemical structures (e.g. [PubChem](https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) [@doi:10.1093/nar/gky1033], with over 100M entries) or biological organisms (e.g. [GBIF](https://www.gbif.org) [@GBIFOrg2020], with over 1,900M entries), but scarce interlinkages limit their application for documentation of NP occurrence(s).
Currently, no open, cross-kingdom, comprehensive and computer-interpretable electronic NP resource links NP and their containing organisms, along with referral to the underlying experimental work.
This shortcoming breaks the crucial evidentiary link required for tracing information back to the original data and assessing its quality.
Even valuable commercially available efforts for compiling NP data, such as the [Dictionary of Natural Products](https://dnp.chemnetbase.com) (DNP), can lack proper documentation of these critical links.

Pioneering efforts to address such challenges led to the establishment of [KNApSAck](http://www.knapsackfamily.com/KNApSAcK) [@doi:10.1007/3-540-29782-0_13], which is likely the first public, curated electronic NP resource of referenced structure-organism pairs.
KNApSAck currently contains 50,000+ structures and 100,000+ structure-organism pairs.
However, the organism field is not standardized and access to the data is not straightforward.
Another early-established electronic NP resources is the NAPRALERT dataset [@doi:10.1016/b978-008045382-8.00060-5], which was compiled over five decades from the NP literature, gathering and annotating data derived from over 200,000 primary literature sources.
This dataset contains 200,000+ distinct compound names and structural elements, along with 500,000+ records of distinct, fully-cited structure-organism pairs.
In total, NAPRALERT contains over 900,000 such records, due to equivalent structure-organism pairs reported in different citations.
However, NAPRALERT is not an open platform and employs an access model that provides only limited free searches of the dataset.
Finally, the [NPAtlas](https://www.npatlas.org) [@doi:10/gh5ptm; @doi:10.1093/nar/gkab941] is a more recent project complying with the FAIR (<u>F</u>indability, <u>A</u>ccessibility, <u>I</u>nteroperability and <u>R</u>euse) guidelines for digital assets [@doi:10/bdd4] and offering convenient web access.
While the NPAtlas allows retrieval and encourages submission of compounds with their biological source, it focuses on microbial NP and ignores a wide range of biosynthetically active organisms found in the Plantae kingdom.

Building on experience gained with the recently published [COlleCtion of Open NatUral producTs](https://coconut.naturalproducts.net) (COCONUT) [@doi:10/ghssx5], the LOTUS initiative seeks to address the aforementioned shortcomings.
At its current stage of development, LOTUS disseminates 750,000+ referenced structure-organism pairs.
After extensive data curation and harmonization, each pair was standardized at the chemical, biological and reference levels.
These efforts and experiences represent an intensive preliminary curatorial phase and the first major step towards providing a high quality, computer-interpretable knowledge base capable of transforming NP research data management from a classical (siloed) database approach to an optimally-shared resource.

### Accommodating Principles of FAIRness and TRUSTworthiness for Natural Products Knowledge Management

In awareness of the multi-faceted pitfalls associated with implementing, using and maintaining classical scientific DBs [@doi:10/gc4h7x], and to enhance current and future sharing options, the LOTUS initiative selected the [Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:Main_Page) platform for disseminating its resources.
The idea of using wikis to disseminate databases is not new, with multiple underlying advantages [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkr1195].
Since its creation, Wikidata has focused on cross-disciplinary and multilingual support.
Wikidata is curated and governed collaboratively by a global community of volunteers, about 20,000 of which are contributing monthly.
Wikidata currently contains more than 1 billion statements in the form of subject-predicate-object triples.
Triples are machine-interpretable and can be enriched with qualifiers and references.
Within Wikidata, data triples correspond to approximately 100 million entries, which can be grouped into classes as diverse as countries, songs, disasters, or chemical compounds.
The statements are closely integrated with [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page) and serve as the source for many of its infoboxes.
Various workflows have been established for reporting such classes, particularly those of interest to life sciences, such as genes, proteins, diseases, drugs, or biological taxa [@doi:10/ggqqc6].

Building on the principles and experiences described above, the present report introduces the development and implementation of the LOTUS workflow for NP occurrence curation and dissemination, which applies both FAIR and TRUST (<u>T</u>ransparency, <u>R</u>esponsibility, <u>U</u>ser focus, <u>S</u>ustainability and <u>T</u>echnology) principles [@doi:10/ggwrtj].
LOTUS data upload and retrieval procedures ensure optimal accessibility by the research community, allowing any researcher to contribute, edit and reuse the data with a clear and open CC0 license ([Creative Commons 0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0)).

Despite many advantages, Wikidata hosting has some notable, yet manageable drawbacks.
While its SPARQL query language offers a powerful way to query available data, it can also appear intimidating to the less experienced user.
Furthermore, some typical queries of molecular electronic NP resources such as structural or spectral searches are not yet available in Wikidata.
To address these shortcomings, LOTUS is hosted in parallel at [https://lotus.naturalproducts.net](https://lotus.naturalproducts.net) (LNPN) within the naturalproducts.net ecosystem.
The [Natural Products Online](https://naturalproducts.net) website is a portal for open-source and open-data resources for NP research.
In addition to the generalistic COCONUT and LNPN databases, the portal will enable hosting of arbitrary and skinned collections, themed in particular by species or taxonomic clade, by geographic location or by institution, together with a range of cheminformatics tools for NP research.
LNPN is periodically updated with the latest LOTUS data.
This dual hosting provides an integrated, community-curated and vast knowledge base (*via* Wikidata), as well as a NP community-oriented product with tailored search modes (*via* LNPN). The multiple data interaction options should establish the basis for the transparent and sustainable access, sharing and creation of knowledge on NP occurrence.


The LOTUS initiative was initially launched to answer our need to access the most comprehensive compilation of biological occurrences of NP. Indeed, we recently highlighted the interest of considering the taxonomic dimension when annotating metabolites [@doi:10/fm73]. This being said, many other concrete applications can result from an access by the scientific community to the LOTUS initiative data. For example, such a resource will facilitate the exploration of eco-evolutionary mechanisms at the molecular level [@doi:10/ghssx4]. In terms of drug discovery, this resource is extremely valuable to orient and guide researchers interested in a structure of interest. On the same theme, LOTUS is expected to be the perfect place to encounter "molecular arguments" for biodiversity conservation [@doi:10.1046/j.1365-2664.2003.00803.x]. Researchers interested in the history of science will be able, through this kind of resource, to gain a preliminary view of the temporal evolution of disciplines such as pharmacognosy.
More generally, the objective of the LOTUS initiative is to prepare the ground for an electronic and globally accessible resource that would be the counterpart, at the metabolite level, of established databases linking proteins to biological organisms (eg. [Uniprot](https://www.uniprot.org/)) and genes to biological organisms ([Genbank](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/)). Once such an objective is reached, it will be possible to interconnect the three central objects of the living, i.e. metabolites, proteins and genes, through the common entity of these resources, the biological organism. Such an interconnection, fostering cross-fertilization of the fields of chemistry, biology and associated disciplines is desirable and necessary to advance towards a better understanding of Life.
