## Conclusion & Perspectives

### Advancing Natural Products Knowledge

At its current development stage, data harmonized and curated throughout the LOTUS initiative remain imperfect and, by the very nature of research, at least partially biased (see [Introduction](#introduction)).
In the context of bioactive NP research, and due to global editorial practices, it should not be ignored that many publications tend to emphasize new compounds and/or those for which interesting bioactivity has been measured.
Near-ubiquitous (primarily plant-based) compounds tend to be overrepresented in the NP literature, yet the implication of their wide distribution in nature and associated patterns of broad, non-specific activity are often underappreciated [@doi:10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01009].
Ideally, all characterized compounds independent of structural novelty and/or bioactivity profile should be documented, and the expansion of verified structure-organism pairs is fundamental to the advancement of NP research.

The LOTUS initiative provides a framework for rigorous review and incorporation of new records and already presents a valuable overview of the distribution of NP occurrences studied to date.
While current data presents a reasonable approximation of the chemistries of a few well-studied organisms such as *Arabidopsis thaliana*, they remain patchy for many other organisms represented in the dataset.
Community participation is the most efficient means of achieving more comprehensive documentation of NP occurrences, and the comprehensive editing opportunities provided within LOTUS and through the associated Wikidata distribution platform open new opportunities for collaborative engagement.
In addition to facilitating the introduction of new data, it also provides a forum for critical review of existing data, as well as harmonization and verification of existing NP datasets as they come online.

### Fostering FAIRness and TRUSTworthiness

The LOTUS harmonized data and dissemination of referenced structure-organism pairs through Wikidata, enables novel forms of queries and transformational perspectives in NP research.
As LOTUS follows the guidelines of FAIRness and TRUSTworthiness, all researchers across disciplines can benefit from this opportunity, whether the interest is in ecology and evolution, chemical ecology, drug discovery, biosynthesis pathway elucidation, chemotaxonomy, or other research fields that connect with NP.

The introduction of LOTUS even provides a new opportunity to advance the FAIR guiding principles for scientific data management and stewardship originally established in 2016 [@doi:10/bdd4].
Researchers worldwide uniformly acknowledge the limitations caused by the intrinsic unavailability of essential (raw) data [@doi:10.1039/c6np00022c].
The lack of progress is, at least in part, due to elements in the dissemination channels of the classical print and static PDF publication formats that complicate or sometimes even discourage data sharing, e.g., due to page limitations and economically motivated mechanisms, including those involved in the focus on and calculation of journal impact factors.
In particular raw data such as experimental readings, spectroscopic data, instrumental measurements, statistical, and other calculations are valued by all, but disseminated by only very few.
The immense value of raw data and the desire to advance the public dissemination has recently been documented in detail for nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopic data by a large consortium of NP researchers [@doi:10.1039/c7np00064b].
However, to generate the vital flow of contributed data, the effort associated with preparing and submitting content to open repositories as well as data reuse should be better acknowledged in academia, government, regulatory, and industrial environments [@doi:10/gh533h; @doi:10/gfnxpj; @doi:10/gf3j9t].

### Opening New Perspectives for Spectral Data

The possibilities for expansion and future applications of the Wikidata-based LOTUS initiative are significant.
For example, properly formatted spectral data, e.g., data obtained by MS or NMR, can be linked to the Wikidata entries for the respective chemical compounds.
MassBank [@doi:10/d8pdcr] and SPLASH [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq476] identifiers are already reported in Wikidata, and this existing information can be used to report MassBank or SPLASH records for example for *Arabidopsis thaliana* compounds ([https://w.wiki/3PJD](https://w.wiki/3PJD)).
Such possibilities will help to bridge experimental data results obtained during the early stages of NP research with data that has been reported and formatted in different contexts.
This opens exciting perspectives for structural dereplication, NP annotation, and metabolomic analysis.
The authors have previously demonstrated that taxonomically-informed metabolite annotation is critical for the improvement of the NP annotation process [@doi:10/fm73].
Alternative approaches linking structural annotation to biological organisms have also shown substantial improvements [@doi:10.1101/2021.03.18.435634].
The LOTUS initiative offers new opportunities for linking chemical objects to both their biological occurrences and spectral information and should significantly facilitate such applications.

### Integrating Chemodiversity, Biodiversity, and Human Health

As shown in [SI-5](#si-5-complement-to-figure-7), observing the chemical and biological diversity at various granularities can offer new insights.
Regarding the chemical objects involved, it will be important to document the taxonomies of chemical annotations for the Wikidata entries.
However, this is a rather complex task, for which stability and coverage issues will have to be addressed first.
Existing chemical taxonomies such as ChEBI, ClassyFire, or NPClassifier are evolving steadily, and it will be important to constantly update the tools used to make further annotations.
Repositioning NP within their greater biosynthetic context is another major challenge - and active field of research.
The fact that the LOTUS disseminates data through Wikidata will help facilitate its integration with biological pathway knowledge bases such as [WikiPathways](https://www.wikipathways.org/index.php/WikiPathways) and contribute to this complex task [@doi:10/gh6dq2; @doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1064].

In the field of ecology, for example, molecular traits are gaining increased attention [@doi:10/gftqcm; @doi:10/ghttk6].
Conceptually, LOTUS can help associate classical plant traits (e.g., leaf surface area, photosynthetic capacities, etc.) with Wikidata biological organisms entries, and, thus, allow their integration and comparison with chemicals that are associated with the organisms.
Likewise, the association of biogeography data documented in repositories such as GBIF could be further exploited in Wikidata to pursue the exciting but understudied topic of “chemodiversity hotspots” [@doi:10/ghssx4].

Further NP-related information of great interest remains poorly formatted.
One example of such a shortcoming relates to traditional medicine, including ethnomedicine and ethnobotany, which is the historical and empiric approach of mankind to discover and use bioactive products from Nature, primarily plants.
The amount of knowledge generated in human history on the use of medicinal substances represents fascinating yet underutilized information.
Notably, the body of literature on the pharmacology and toxicology of NP is compound-centric, increases steadily, and relatively scattered, but still highly relevant (not necessarily: sufficient) for exploring the role and potential utility of NP for human health.
To this end, the LOTUS initiative represents a resource for new concepts by which such information could be valued and conserved in the digital era, as LOTUS provides a blueprint for appropriate formatting and sharing of such data [@doi:10/ggb79p; @doi:10/gh533j; @doi:10.1177/1934578X1701200849].
This underscores the transformative value of the LOTUS initiative for the advancement of Traditional Medicine and its drug discovery potential in health systems worldwide.

### Summary & Outlook

The various facets discussed above connect with ongoing and future developments that the tandem of the LOTUS initiative and its Wikidata integration can accommodate through a broader knowledge base.
The information of the LOTUS initiative is already readily accessible by third party projects build on top of Wikidata such as the SLING project ([https://github.com/ringgaard/sling](https://github.com/ringgaard/sling), see entry for [gliotoxin](https://ringgaard.com/kb/Q413364)) or the Plant Humanities Lab project ([https://lab.plant-humanities.org/](https://lab.plant-humanities.org/), see entry for [*Ilex guayusa*](https://search.plant-humanities.org/?eid=wd%3AQ3772280)).

Behind the scenes, all underlying resources represent data in a multidimensional space and can be extracted as individual graphs that can be interconnected.
The craft of appropriate federated queries allows users to navigate these graphs and fully exploit their potential [@doi:10/gdn52j; @doi:10/ggqqc6].
The development of interfaces such as RDFFrames [@wikidata:Q106204599] will also facilitate the use of the wide arsenal of existing machine learning approaches to automate reasoning on these knowledge graphs.

Overall, the LOTUS initiative aims to make more and better data available.
This project paves the way for the establishment of an open and expandable electronic NP resource.
The design and efforts of the LOTUS initiative reflect our conviction that the integration of NP research results is long-needed and requires a truly open and FAIR knowledge base.
We believe that the LOTUS initiative has the potential to fuel a virtuous cycle of research habits and, as a result, *contribute to a better understanding of Life and its chemistry*.
