## Acknowledgments {.page_break_before}

AR, JLW and PMA are thankful to the Swiss National Science Foundation for supporting part of this project through the SNF Sinergia grant CRSII5_189921.
JB and AR are really thankful to JetBrains for the Free educational license of IntelliJ and the excellent support received on Youtrack.
JB, JGG, and GFP gratefully acknowledge the support of this work by grant U41 AT008706 and supplemental funding to P50 AT000155 from NCCIH and ODS of the NIH.
MS and CS are supported by the German Research Foundation within the framework ChemBioSys (Project-ID 239748522, SFB 1127).
EW and DM acknowledge the Scholia grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation under grant number G-2019-11458.
The work on the Wikidata IDSM/Sachem endpoint was supported by an ELIXIR CZ research infrastructure project grant (MEYS Grant No: LM2018131) including access to computing and storage facilities.
The authors would like to thank [Dmitry Mozzherin](https://github.com/dimus) for his work done for the Global Names Architecture and related improvements.
They would like to acknowledge help from the PubChem team in integrating LOTUS, especially Dr. Tiejun Cheng and Dr. Evan Bolton.
The authors would also like to thank Layla Michán for starting to add pigment information on Wikidata.
The authors would also like to thank the team behind [Manubot](https://manubot.org/) [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007128], used to write this manuscript.
The authors would also like to thank contributors of all electronic NP resources used in this work and the NP community at large.

## Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interest.
